Chapter 3
Private-Key Encryption
In the previous chapter we saw some fundamental limitations of perfect se-
crecy. In this chapter we begin our study of modern cryptography by intro-
ducing the weaker (but sufficient) notion of computational secrecy. We will
then show how this definition can be used to bypass the impossibility results
shown previously and, in particular, how a short key (say, 128 bits long) can
be used to encrypt many long messages (say, gigabytes in total).
Along the way we will study the fundamental notion of pseudorandomness,
which captures the idea that something can “look” completely random even
though it is not. This powerful concept underlies much of modern cryptogra-
phy, and has applications and implications beyond the field as well.
3.1 Computational Security
In Chapter 2 we introduced the notion of perfect secrecy. While perfect
secrecy is a worthwhile goal, it is also unnecessarily strong. Perfect secrecy
requires that absolutely no information about an encrypted message is leaked,
even to an eavesdropper with unlimited computational power. For all practical
purposes, however, an encryption scheme would still be considered secure if
it leaked only a tiny amount of information to eavesdroppers with bounded
computational power. For example, a scheme that leaks information with
probability at most 2−60 to eavesdroppers investing up to 200 years of com-
putational effort on the fastest available supercomputer is adequate for any
real-world application. Security definitions that take into account computa-
tional limits on the attacker, and allow for a small probability of failure, are
called computational, to distinguish them from notions (like perfect secrecy)
that are information-theoretic in nature. Computational security is now the
de facto way in which security is defined for all cryptographic purposes.
We stress that although we give up on obtaining perfect security, this does
not mean we do away with the rigorous mathematical approach. Definitions
and proofs are still essential, and the only difference is that we now consider
weaker (but still meaningful) definitions of security.
Computational security incorporates two relaxations relative to information-
